RDB Loader 6.0.0 (#808)
snowplow/documentation: docs/pipeline-components-and-applications/loaders-storage-targets/snowplow-rdb-loader/upgrade-guides/6-0-0-upgrade-guide/index.md

---
title: "6.0.0 upgrade guide"
sidebar_position: -20
---

```mdx-code-block
import License from "@site/docs/pipeline-components-and-applications/loaders-storage-targets/snowplow-rdb-loader/reusable/license/_index.mdx"

<License/>
```

## [Redshift-only] New migration mechanism & recovery tables

### What is schema evolution?

> One of Snowplow’s key features is the ability to [define custom schemas and validate events against them](/docs/understanding-your-pipeline/schemas/). Over time, users often evolve the schemas, e.g. by adding new fields or changing existing fields. To accommodate these changes, RDB loader automatically adjusts the database tables in the warehouse accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of Snowplow’s key features is the ability to [define custom schemas and validate events against them](/docs/understanding-your-pipeline/schemas/index.md). Over time, users often evolve the schemas, e.g. by adding new fields or changing existing fields. To accommodate these changes, RDB loader automatically adjusts the database tables in the warehouse accordingly.
```

There are two main types of schema changes:

**Breaking**: The schema version has to be changed in a major way (`1-2-3` → `2-0-0`). In Redshift, each major schema version has its own table (`..._1`, `..._2`, etc, for example: `com_snowplowanalytics_snowplow_ad_click_1`).

**Non-breaking**: The schema version can be changed in a minor way (`1-2-3` → `1-3-0` or `1-2-3` → `1-2-4`). Data is stored in the same database table.

### How it used to work

> In the past, the transformer would format the data according to the latest version of the schema it saw (for a given major version, e.g. `1-*-*`). For example, if a batch contained events with schema versions `1-0-0`, `1-0-1` and `1-0-2`, the transformer would structure the shredded data based on version `1-0-2`. Then the loader would adjust the database table and load the file.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is an exact picture of how it worked so far, especially in case iglu server has 1-0-3 or later versions

pre-6.0.0, for an entity, transformer would fetch all schemas (which conforms to the `vendor/name/model-*-*` criterion of the entity) from iglu server, merge them, extract properties from json, stringify using tab char as delimeter and put null char in case the property is missing

pre-6.0.0, loader would do the same and this could lead to a race condition hence loading failure as explained [here](https://github.com/snowplow/engineering-announcements/pull/103/files#diff-806b4b8b31cd7d65fa9755b01277baddc7eb35772cc7140331f4060f767080f0R9-R11)

As of 6.0.0, loader migrates up to the max SchemaVer seen in the shredding_complete batch, not in the iglu server

      "a": {"type": "integer"},
      "b": {"type": "integer"}
   }
}
```

Second, the loader does not fail when it can’t modify the database table to store both old and new events. (As a reminder, an example would be changing the type of a field from `integer` to `string`.) Instead, it creates a table for the new data as an exception. The users can then run SQL statements to resolve this situation as they see fit. For instance, consider these two schemas:
```json
{
   // 1-0-0
   "properties": {
      "a": {"type": "integer"}
   }
}
```

```json
{
   // 1-0-1
   "properties": {
      "a": {"type": "string"}
   }
}
```

Because `1-0-1` events cannot be loaded into the same table with `1-0-0`, the data would be put in a separate table, e.g. `com_snowplowanalytics_ad_click_1_0_1_recovered_9999999`, where:
  - `1_0_1` is the version of the offending schema;
  - `9999999` is a hash code unique to the schema (i.e. it will change if the schema is overwritten with a different one).

If you create a new schema `1-0-2` that reverts the offending changes and is again compatible with `1-0-0`, the data for events with that schema will be written to the original table as expected.

> ### Identification of the schemas that need patching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Identifying schemas that need patching
```

> After the rdb-loader's upgrade, users might find out that some old schema lineages land in the recovery table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After upgrading RDB Loader, you might find out that events or entities with some of the old schemas land in recovery tables.
```

> To avoid this, older iglu schemas must be patched to align with the latest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid this, the offending older Iglu schemas must be patched to align with the latest.
```

> 
> To help with the identification of the schemas that need patching, we have rewritten the rdbms table-check command.
> `igluctl` will now cross-check the types between the iglu server and RedShift or Postgres. Depending on what types
> offended the schema errors might vary.
> 
> Procedure of identifying offending warehouse patches is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the latest version of `igluctl` to do this:
```

> 1) Run `igluctl static generate` command. If recovery table to be created it will show up as a warning message. Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) Run the `igluctl static generate` command. If a recovery table is to be created, it will show up as a warning message. Example:
```

```bash
mkdir <schemas_folder> <sql_folder>
igluctl static pull <schemas_folder> <iglu_url> <iglu_key>
igluctl static generate <schemas_folder> <sql_folder> 
# ...

> # iglu:com.snowplowanalytics.iglu/resolver-config/jsonschema/1-0-3 has a breaking change Incompatible encoding in column cache_size old type RedshiftBigInt/ZstdEncoding new type RedshiftDouble/RawEncoding

Reviewer: It’s not clear what users should do in this case. Should they proceed to step 2 to see if 1-0-3 was never used? And if it was used, what should they do? (Is that even possible, given that the loading would have broken in this case?)

# ...
```

> 2) Run `table-check` to crosscheck if warehouse was patched. This is done in case if  schema lineage had a broken schema
>    that were supreseed and no longer used, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) Run the `igluctl table-check` command to check if the warehouse was patched. This is done in case there are incorrectly evolved schema versions that were never used, for example:
```

```

> 100 - {"type" : "integer"}
> 101 - {"type" : "number"}  // deprecated
> 102 - {"type" : "integer"} // new corrected version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* version `1-0-0`: `{"type" : "integer"}`
* version `1-0-1`: `{"type" : "number"}` (deprecated, never used)
* version `1-0-2`: `{"type" : "integer"}` (new, corrected version)
```

```

> Situation above is not an issue, but would produce a warning in step 1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The situation above is not an issue, but would produce a warning in step 1).
```

```bash

> igluctl --server <iglu_url> \

Reviewer: This command does not have `table-check` in it?

        --apikey <iglu_key> \
        --host <redshift_host> \
        --port <redshift_port> \
        --username <username> \
        --password <password> \
        --dbname  <database> \
        --dbschema <schema>
# ...

> # * Comment problem - SchemaKey found in table comment [iglu:com.test/test/jsonschema/1-0-0] does not match expected [iglu:com.test/test/jsonschema/1-0-1]

Reviewer: I don’t fully understand what this means. Why would the table comment be 1-0-0 when a newer schema exists? Did the user alter the table manually? I think I am missing the link between step 1 and this case in step 2. In step 1 we said “check if you have schema versions that will create recovery tables”. Then we said step 2 would be to see which of those we need to worry about (the above example shows that we don’t need to worry about schemas that were never used... btw is that the case in Redshift? Doesn’t it always try to migrate the table as soon as the schema is created?). But now we are somehow discovering that tables were manually altered?

# * Column doesn't match, expected: 'wrong_type BIGINT', actual: 'wrong_type VARCHAR(4096)'
# * Column existing in the storage but is not defined in the schema: 'only_in_storage VARCHAR(4096)'
# ...   
```

> After offending schemas were identified earlier version of them should be patched to reflect the database changes.
> Process above created a divergence in schema lineage. In such situations original schema without this patch schema `1-0-1` would land in a recovery table after loader upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After identifying all the offending schemas, you should patch them to reflect the changes in the warehouse.
The example above shows how the table structure does not match the schema. In such situations, if you don’t patch schema `1-0-0` appropriately,  schema `1-0-1` would land in a recovery table after the loader upgrade.
```

Reviewer: Is it safe to patch 1-0-0?

> Schema casting rules could be found [here](/docs/storing-querying/schemas-in-warehouse/?warehouse=redshift#types).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema casting rules could be found [here](/docs/storing-querying/schemas-in-warehouse/index.md?warehouse=redshift#types).
```

#### `$.featureFlags.disableRecovery` configuration

> This is useful if you have older schemas with breaking changes and don’t want the loader to apply the new logic to them.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> If you have older schemas with breaking changes and don’t want the loader to apply the new logic to them, you can use `$.featureFlags.disableRecovery` configuration. For the provided schema criterions only, RDB Loader will neither migrate the corresponding shredded table nor create recovery tables for breaking schema versions. Loader will attempt to load to the corresponding shredded table without migrating.

Reviewer: Could we provide an example of how this is set?

In order to solve this problem, we should patch `1-0-0` with `{ "type": "integer", "maximum": 1000000 }`. In this case, there won't be any breaking change between versions `1-0-0` and `1-0-1`. RDB Loader 6.0.0+ will then successfully load events into the intended table as expected.

After identifying all the offending schemas, you should patch them to reflect the changes in the warehouse.

Schema casting rules could be found [here](/docs/storing-querying/schemas-in-warehouse/index.md?warehouse=redshift#types).

#### `$.featureFlags.disableRecovery` configuration

If you have older schemas with breaking changes and don’t want the loader to apply the new logic to them, you can use `$.featureFlags.disableRecovery` configuration. For the provided schema criterions only, RDB Loader will neither migrate the corresponding shredded table nor create recovery tables for breaking schema versions. Loader will attempt to load to the corresponding shredded table without migrating.

> You can set it like following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set it as follows:
```

```json
{
  ...
  "featureFlags": {

>     "disableRecovery": [ "iglu:com.example/myschema1/jsonschema/1-*-*", "iglu:com.example/myschema2/jsonschema/1-*-*"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "disableRecovery": [
      "iglu:com.example/myschema1/jsonschema/1-*-*",
      "iglu:com.example/myschema2/jsonschema/1-*-*"
    ]
```

---
title: "6.0.0 upgrade guide"
sidebar_position: -20
---

> ## License acceptance

Reviewer: Not using the reusable block? :)

# ...
```

2) Run `table-check` to crosscheck if warehouse was patched. This is done in case if  schema lineage had a broken schema
   that were supreseed and no longer used, for example:
```
100 - {"type" : "integer"}
101 - {"type" : "number"}  // deprecated
102 - {"type" : "integer"} // new corrected version
```
Situation above is not an issue, but would produce a warning in step 1).
```bash
igluctl --server <iglu_url> \
        --apikey <iglu_key> \
        --host <redshift_host> \
        --port <redshift_port> \
        --username <username> \
        --password <password> \
        --dbname  <database> \
        --dbschema <schema>
# ...
# * Comment problem - SchemaKey found in table comment [iglu:com.test/test/jsonschema/1-0-0] does not match expected [iglu:com.test/test/jsonschema/1-0-1]
# * Column doesn't match, expected: 'wrong_type BIGINT', actual: 'wrong_type VARCHAR(4096)'
# * Column existing in the storage but is not defined in the schema: 'only_in_storage VARCHAR(4096)'
# ...   
```

> This might produce false positives for the JSONpaths managed tables.

Reviewer: I think we can leave this out, as this would be for very old versions only.

To avoid this, the offending older Iglu schemas must be patched to align with the latest.

You can use the latest version of `igluctl` to do this.

> To illustrate, let's say we have `1-0-0` and `1-0-1` that differs on one field only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate, let's say we have schema versions `1-0-0` and `1-0-1` that differ in one field only:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * version `1-0-0`: `{ "type": "integer", "maximum": 100 }` - translates to `SMALLINT`. All is going good.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* version `1-0-0`: `{ "type": "integer", "maximum": 100 }` - translates to `SMALLINT`. All is good.
```

> * version `1-0-1`: `{ "type": "integer", "maximum": 1000000 }` - breaking change as it translates to `INT` and loader can't
>   migrate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* version `1-0-1`: `{ "type": "integer", "maximum": 1000000 }` - breaking change as it translates to `INT` and the loader can't migrate the column.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Since `1-0-1` had breaking change, migration had been performed manually in warehouse previously because, loader couldn't migrate it due to breaking change. After manual migration, events with `1-0-1` schema would be loaded with pre-6.0.0 RDB Loader versions. However, after upgrading RDB Loader to 6.0.0, events with `1-0-1` schema will start to land in the recovery table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since version `1-0-1` had a breaking change, loading must have broken with an older version of RDB Loader. To fix that, the user must have updated the warehouse manually (changing the column type to `INT`). After this manual intervention, events with the `1-0-1` schema would have been loaded successfully with older versions of RDB Loader. However, after an upgrade to RDB Loader 6.0.0, events with the `1-0-1` schema will start to land in the recovery table.
```

Let's see how we can use `igluctl` to solve this problem.

1) Run the `igluctl static generate` command. If a recovery table is to be created, it will show up as a warning message. Example:
```bash
mkdir <schemas_folder> <sql_folder>
igluctl static pull <schemas_folder> <iglu_url> <iglu_key>
igluctl static generate <schemas_folder> <sql_folder> 
# ...
# iglu:com.test/test/jsonschema/1-0-1 has a breaking change Incompatible encoding in column example_field old type RedshiftSmallIntZstdEncoding new type RedshiftInt/RawEncoding
# ...
```

> 2) Run the `igluctl table-check` command to check if table structure is inline with the latest schema version that doesn't contain any breaking change. With the example schemas above, this would be `1-0-0` because `1-0-1` contains breaking change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) Run the `igluctl table-check` command to check if table structure is in line with the latest schema version that doesn't contain any breaking changes. With the example schemas above, this would be `1-0-0` because `1-0-1` contains a breaking change.
```

        --dbname  <database> \
        --dbschema <schema>
# ...
# * Column doesn't match, expected: 'example_field SMALLINT', actual: 'example_field INT'
# ...   
```

> We got `Column doesn't match` output with the above example because, the table column had been migrated manually from `SMALLINT` to `INT`. Since the latest schema version that doesn't contain any breaking change is `1-0-0`, `table-check` command expects to see `SMALLINT` in the table therefore it gives `Column doesn't match` output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We got the `Column doesn't match` output with the above example because the table column had been migrated manually from `SMALLINT` to `INT`. Since the latest schema version that doesn't contain any breaking change is `1-0-0`, `table-check` command expects to see `SMALLINT` in the table therefore it gives the `Column doesn't match` output.
```

> In order to solve this problem, we should patch `1-0-0` with `{ "type": "integer", "maximum": 1000000 }`. In this case, there won't be any breaking change and events can be loaded to intended table as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to solve this problem, we should patch `1-0-0` with `{ "type": "integer", "maximum": 1000000 }`. In this case, there won't be any breaking change between versions `1-0-0` and `1-0-1`. RDB Loader 6.0.0+ will then successfully load events into the intended table as expected.
```
